# SoFi: Reimagining Personal Finances
### Eli Holden 9/20/20 (Homework Assignment 1)

In finance there is a concept of a moral hazard. Imagine a friend asking to borrow $10 and promising to pay it back in a day. That friend has properly aligned interests because he or she wants to maintain the friendship which will only happen upon prompt and full repayment. However, imagine lending $10 to a stranger. That stranger poses a moral hazard because despite keeping their word there is no incentive for that person to pay back the money. These moral hazards put barriers in the financial world that typically cause lower availability of financial capital and higher costs to borrow.

The time is now August 2011 and Mike Cagney, former head trader of Wells Fargo, sees an opportunity in the financial industry. Students often are forced to pay higher interest rates on loans because of the limited access to financial capital, lack of credit history, and no current employment. He joins forces with three other alumni of Stanford University: Dan Macklin, James Finnigan, and Ian Brady to found Social Finance, Inc. (SoFi). The company is funded through recent alumni of higher education institutions whose money is then matched and lent to students at their respective schools. [2]

This model solves the moral hazard problem. Now, the lenders have an additional interest in seeing the students succeed because not only will they get repaid with interest, but it is the reputation of the institutions with whom they represent that is also on the line. Students have even more incentives as they benefit from lower rates to borrow and potential employment opportunities from those that they are lending from. This is what Mike Cagney said about the problem and the SoFi solution, “Between the government – which accounts for 93 percent of student lending, students and schools, no single party is particularly vested in the others’ long-term success. What is missing is a community solution where the interests of all members are aligned. Alumni provide the missing ingredient as they care deeply about both the students and the reputation of their alma mater.” [3] Mike and the team began their journey with $2M of funds borrowed from 40 alumni and lent to 100 students. Fast forward to today, SoFi has over $50 billion in funded loans and over 1 million members. [1]

What began as an alumni funded model quickly evolved to a broader set of borrowing solutions based on a non-traditional underwriting approach focused on lending to financially responsible individuals. In 2015, SoFi was the first U.S. fintech firm to raise over $1B in a single funding round. The transition away from alumni funding to firm capital allowed for new products such as student loan refinancing, mortgages, personal loans, and in 2019 SoFi began offering investment platforms. Despite shifting away from the original model, the mission stayed focus on solving financial industry problems by having a positive social impact. This is encompassed through their mission statement of “helping people get their money right.” [1]

The company today focuses on four keys to financial success: 1) Attack debt with a plan 2) Always have a safety net 3) Put your money to work 4) Save for retirement and other goals. It is currently led by Anthony Noto former CFO of Twitter and investment banker at Goldman Sachs. Membership is structured around your money, your community, and your career. By offering members these services at no additional cost SoFi can help its community succeed which in turn helps SoFi through higher investment returns. The obvious question is why are there not existing entities that do just that?

A quick survey of the industry landscape shows why the over $1T student loan market has its share of flaws. There are two broad types of student loans: Federal or Private. Federal loans began in 1958 under the Federal Family Education Loan (FFEL) program and offered a cheaper and viable solution for students looking to borrow money. [5] The advantages of a government program allow broader access to financial capital especially from those that are considered higher risk borrowers and cheaper costs than those from private institutions. Those same advantages work against borrowers who are lower risk or might not be eligible for government student loans hence a private loan solution. In both cases of government or private, neither lender has a significant interest in a particular student’s success other than getting back the money that was borrowed plus interest.

SoFi is not a solution for government loans nor can any private bank be since the repercussions of defaults mean that a government can raise taxes, but a private bank goes out of business. SoFi targets the traditional and non-traditional private lenders such as Sallie Mae, Discover, Ascent, Stride, and Earnest. The solution to a traditional private lender is the non-traditional underwriting process. Forbes describes perfectly how SoFi takes advantage of the weaknesses with the FICO score model,

> “If you do not use credit, you will not have a credit score. However, millennials who decide to save money and avoid credit can actually be an excellent credit risk. A lender who quickly realized this is SoFi. Rather than relying exclusively upon your FICO, SoFi uses an underwriting model that also considers your university, course of study, post-graduation employment and income. SoFi's approach to underwriting may sound old-fashioned. I would argue that it is refreshingly old-fashioned.” [4]

Others have come up with creative ways to be better aligned, but fail to realize the student’s best interests. For example, some non-traditional models use an income share agreement where upon graduation the lender receives a portion of the annual pay from the worker. This model most certainly works against the borrower because of the years of lower income they realize upon graduation. SoFi targets the altruistic side of lending by giving free services to its members such as financial planning advice, free will drafting, networking events, a Facebook community, discounts on SAT/ACT prep courses, personalized action plans to help you get a raise, personalized career advice that includes one-on-one coaching, unemployment protection program that helps you with your job search and can even pause a loan, and most importantly education on the costs of borrowing and financial aid options even when not recommending SoFi as the final solution. [1] Lastly, the benefit of SoFi offering multiple financial services of lending (mortgages, student aid, small business and personal) as well as investing, insurance, and cash management solutions creates convenience and savings for its members.

To grow further SoFi acquired the global payment processor Galileo who it was already a customer of. This deal showcases part of the growing technology usage at the company in terms of money management and payment processing. However, Galileo is more than just a payment processor, it offers its customers a wide range of services whether it be having development access on an open API in order to create new card products and a sandbox for testing or a small company looking to scale its businesses without the excessive fees and human capital requirements of a large back office operations team. [7]

The customizable advice solutions offered with SoFi are likely using advanced financial technologies of machine learning, artificial intelligence, and blockchain although the company does not explicitly claim these as its tools. To offer automated customized advice there would need to be a program that can store, analyze, and interpret historical data as well as follow a user’s inputs to determine what best outcomes should be had. That can be in the case of investing when it comes to risk preferences and return goals to offer the right balance of asset classes across equities, bonds, and other asset classes. It can also be the case for career advice where it takes information about your personal situation such as how much debt you have, where you currently work, any market based information available, and spending habits to determine what you can personally do to meet your retirement goals or achieve personal financial outcomes such as home ownership. Lastly, it can send automated suggestions for career advice such as networking events that may lead to a better job, job postings that align with your skill set, or marketplace information that may help you negotiate a raise.

The social impact and technologies used to accomplish the mission are only good if the results show the benefits. In the case of SoFi, they proudly advertise that over $22B in debt has been paid off by members. [1] The ultimate measure of success would be showing the likely lower default rate of lenders with SoFi than traditional lenders. Private companies are not required to publish this information and larger institutions would be using aggregated statistics which are not as comparable. The other difficult aspect of this measure is whether the products, technologies, and services are actually leading to lower defaults or whether the underwriting (screening) process used by SoFi reduces the number based on better credit borrowers. The best comparison would be to take the same credit score borrowers and compare the default rate among those groups at different companies.

One recommendation for a future product is the development of a college counseling program for high school students. This would be another automated service/tool using AI, but the utilization could harness the massive amount of student loan information from college programs, employment outcomes, and the borrower’s financial responsibility to give advice on whether the considered school, program, and career path are right for a student based on the expected costs and longer term financial gains. The other datapoints it could look at are personality surveys such as Myers Briggs, job industry trends and placement, and geographical constraints to help align young people with the right career path choices for them.

SoFi is clearly a successful FinTech firm that has made a name for itself in student lending, but now has grown to offer a comprehensive financial solution for all individuals. The expanding use of newer technology combined with its mission should continue to further drive a wedge between itself and the status quo in the banking community. This will inherently better both the company’s financial position as well as the members who utilize its services through added convenience, lower costs, and greater services.

Resources:
1.	SoFi Company Website (https://www.sofi.com/) see web pages: Our Story, Our Leadership, and How it Works
2.	Wikipedia (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SoFi)
3.	Forbes, 4/2/2012. “SoFis New Take on 1 Trillion Student Loan Market”. https://www.forbes.com/sites/petercohan/2012/04/02/sofis-new-take-on-1-trillion-student-loan-market/#61d2b2e979f4
4.	Forbes, 4/21/2015. “5 Reasons New Lenders Are Ignoring FICO Credit Scores”. https://www.forbes.com/sites/nickclements/2015/04/21/5-reasons-new-lenders-are-ignoring-fico-credit-scores/#42bfe7a52838
5.	NewAmerica.org, Federal Student Loan History. https://www.newamerica.org/education-policy/topics/higher-education-funding-and-financial-aid/federal-student-aid/federal-student-loans/federal-student-loan-history/
6.	FinTechMagazine.com, “FinTech Profile: SoFi Personal Finance Innovator”. https://www.fintechmagazine.com/fintech/fintech-profile-sofi-personal-finance-innovator
7.	Galileo Company Website. https://www.galileo-ft.com/platform/
